Hi, guys, in this lesson, I'm going to cover a basic primer on IP addressing, and we are specifically
talking about IP version four, not version six.
I'll cover version six a bit later on in this section.
Now, what I want to do here is assume that you don't have much knowledge of IP addressing at all,
if any, and I'm going to start right at the basics now.
It is a really complex subject, so I'm only going to go as far as what you need to know in order to
be competent working with Amazon VPC and with IP addressing in general with IWC.
Now there will be some areas of the subject matter where you may want to go deeper and has lots of resources
on the internet for doing that.
If you wish to to kick off the lesson, let's start with what is an IP address.
Now, let's say we have a web server on the internet and you want to communicate with that web server.
Now, the web server is likely to have some kind of network interface, and attached to that network
interface will be an IP address.
And this is going to be a public IP address in this case because the web server is available via the
internet.
IP addresses are the addresses that computers use to communicate with each other.
So you've got your computer at home and you've got a web browser open and you type in example, dot
com, the address of our web server.
Now what happens now because you've put in example dot com?
But like I said, the computers communicate using IP addresses.
So this is where a domain name system or DNS server comes in.
Your computer will speak to a DNS server, and it's going to ask that DNS server.
What is the IP address, for example, dot com?
Once your computer has the result, it's then able to connect to the web server using the IP address.
So this is domain name resolution where you're resolving a name, a nice, friendly name that you can
remember easily into an IP address, which is less easy to remember, but it's the way computers actually
communicate with each other.
Let's move on to the structure of an IP address.
Now you very likely see an IP address as we've already worked with them in this course.
So an IP address might look like this one nine two dot one six eight dot zero dot one.
This is known as dotted decimal notation, and it's a simple way of actually representing an IP address.
Now, each of these parts between the dots is actually a binary, OK?
So that's where things get a little bit more complex, but you do need to know this.
So what is a binary octet?
Well, octet means that you have eight values, and those values can even be a one.
Or they can be a zero.
Those are the only two options.
It's binary in this small table here.
You can see that in this case, we have ones eight ones, all in a line.
Now, on the left hand side, we have what's called the most significant bets.
That means if a one is in this left most place, it's going to have a value of 128.
If you have a one on the right hand side, that's the least significant bit, and its value is only
one if you have a zero anywhere.
It just means zero.
So, for example, in this address, the third Octa is a zero.
So that means all of the eight bits are zeros.
The one means that all seven bits are zeros and we have a one on the right hand side.
And that equals this least significant bit here on the very left.
We have one nine two well, one nine two is 128 plus 64.
So we have a one and a one and the remaining values of zeros.
And then for 168, we have a one.
So that's one hundred and twenty eight.
Then we have a one and the third place here, which is thirty two.
And then we have a one in the fifth place here, which is eight.
So we have 128 plus thirty two plus eight equals 168.
The reason it's important to understand this binary is when we get to sub messing with variable length
subnet mask, that's coming shortly.
So firstly, let's understand the network and host portions of an IP address.
Every IP address has a network I.D. and a host IP.
The free blue boxes on the left that represent the network IP.
This value will be the same for every computer on this network.
The host IP will be unique for every computer on this network.
As I said before, every IP address will have a network and host IP, but how this is configured does
vary.
Now, how do we know which piece is the network I.D. and which is the host IP?
Well, that's where the subnet mask comes into play.
Where we have two, five, five in this case, essentially where we have a bit.
That is a one that represents the network I.D..
So here we have eight bits that are one, eight bits that are one, an eight bit set of one.
So those first three octopus are all representing the network I.D..
Now, the last October in the orange box is going to be the host I.D..
That's why it's a zero.
So every bits in the subnet mask that is a zero means that's where we have values that can be assigns,
a hosts and every bit.
That's a one.
Those are values that are going to be exactly the same for every computer on the network.
So a subnet mask is an easy way to see which bit is the network and which portion is the host I.D..
So let's look at an example.
We have a one nine two one six eight zero zero network with a subnet mask that looks like this.
Now this is 24 bits, a 24 bit subnet mask because we have eight ones in those first free boxes, and
that means it's a 24 network.
It's another way of representing the subnet mask.
And that's the format you'll often work with in IWC.
So on this network, we might have several computers and we can see that they each have different host
IDs, but the same network I.D. In this case, the host IDs are one two three four five six and the
Network ID is one nine two one six eight zero for all of the hosts on the network.
We also have something called classes with IP addresses.
Class II looks like this 10 zero zero zero and two five five zero zero zero.
Essentially, you have an eight bit subnet mask, and that means the first assignable dress is going
to be a one.
You can't ever assign zero as an address for a computer on the network.
And the last assignable address is going to be 254 because you can't use 255, which is what's known
as the broadcast address.
Now in IWC, there's also a few other addresses that are reserved with a Class A subnet mask.
You can have up to 126 networks and each of those networks can have a huge number of hosts.
Six million seven hundred seventy seven thousand two hundred fourteen.
And that's because we have all of these bits here to play with for the host IP.
We then got Class B, which has a 16 bit subnet mask.
First assignable address is one seven two six zero one for this example, and the last address would
be the two five four.
Here we have sixteen thousand three hundred eighty two networks, so a lot more networks and the usable
addresses per network has reduced to sixty five five three four.
Lastly, we have a Class C.
This has a 24 bit subnet mask and as you can see, the number of networks has now really increased,
but we don't have as many addresses available per network, so those are the standard classes.
Now there's also something called a private IP address range does a few of these that are reserved for
private use.
That means not on the internet internally within your company.
We have 10 triple zero to 10 two five five two five five two five five one seven two six zero zero two
one seven two three two two five five two five five and then one nine two one six eight zero zero three
two one nine two one six eight zero two five five.
These addresses are reserved for use in private networks, so not internet facing.
You can't use these on the public internet.
Things now get a little bit more complicated.
Sometimes we want to vary the length of our subnet masks, and we don't want to stick to those standard
classes.
So we use something called classless into domain routing, and this helps us optimize the IP space.
Let's have a look at some examples.
Let's say we have this network here.
We have a 24 bit subnet mask.
We have eight high spits and 254 possible addresses.
The first addresses Dot one, the last is Dot to fly for pretty standard so far.
We then have a 16 bit subnet mask.
So with the same network, we're using a different subnet marked a non-standard one in this case because
one nine two one six eight is typically a Class C network.
With a 16 bit subnet mask, we have 16 host bits and up to 65000 534 addresses.
And it looks like this.
But what about a 20 subnet mask will here, as you can see, we have a blue slash orange box.
And that's because we borrowed some bits from the network I.D. to share them and use them for the host
I.D..
That means we now have 12 host bits and 4000 and 94 addresses, so sometimes that's a better configuration
for the number of computers you need to have on the network and the number of networks you actually
need.
And the addresses for this network would start zero one go up to 15 to five four.
So that's classless into domain routing or cider, and it's using variable length subnet masks.
In other words, breaking away from the standard and optimizing the amount of networks and hosts that
we have now, I know that's quite complex and hopefully it will make more sense as we go through the
section.
So that's it for this particular lesson.
I hope you got lots of value from that, and I'll see you in the next lesson.